The Joe Rogan experience.
I would also remind everybody of this with respect to the drug price, um,
discussion that bill, that HR three bill,
it won't become law because the Senate won't take it up and the president won't
sign it. But if it did it wouldn't hurt big pharma.
I think Democrats would like to believe that it would hurt big pharmaceutical
companies. It wouldn't, it would put all of the smaller startup, um,
biotech companies totally out of business because they're the ones who actually,
they start that innovation just, just, just like happens in silicone valley,
the startups start it, and then they get bought out by the bigger companies.
That's sort of how the system works. And it's, it's a very dynamic system. It's,
it's, it's why we are the, by far, the number one innovator in the world,
no other country innovates like we do, they don't do the research like we do.
If we implemented the price controls that are inherent in Medicare for all,
or HR three,
there wouldn't be anybody else in the world doing what we do. Um,
I can relate that back to the coronavirus discussion too on, because there's a,
there's like a, there's a big discussion about, you know,
should we have Medicare for all doesn't coronavirus, uh,
prove that everybody should have a free healthcare. And again,
what I, what I have to remind everybody is is that if we had Medicare for all,
what we're basically talking about our price controls,
because Medicare already pays below average payment for,
for anything we're for whatever service, wherever for whatever doctor visit,
it's about 60, 70% on the dollar. Can.
I stop you right there? Medicare is available for who right now, what.
What is the bubble that it cares for as a senior program? Right.
So what, at what age is it? Does it kick in? Is it 65?
I believe so. Um, yeah, I don't want to confuse it with social security.
So the idea is that for older folks, we should, uh,
give them healthcare and make sure that their basic needs are covered in terms
of sickness, illness, injury, and such.
Yeah. Yeah. I mean the, the entire, you know, it w we could argue that we could,
we could even debate the merits of, of Medicare on its face.
But Medicare for all would be available for everybody. Now,
if Medicare for all was available for everybody,
what you're saying is it was essentially you, you would fix prices on,
on everything in terms of medical treatments.
And that would be a problem because of what.
Well, so, okay. So once you find once you've fixed prices, um, well,
imagine this imagine if, if,
if the government said that your podcast could,
could only take a hundred dollars per ad,
and that was just the price fix from now on what incentive would you have to
really expand your audience?
What expensive one incentive would you have to keep going or expand the
business? You wouldn't be able to it's similar under any industry. Once you,
once you fix that price, you're going to reduce the supply that goes in.
Can I stop you on that analogy? Yeah, here's.
The problem with the differences of it would have to be a reason why they would
say that I could only get $100 per ad.
The reason why you would say that things shouldn't cost too much for someone
who's injured or sick is because we want to take care of each other as a
community.
And the idea is that healthcare should be something that we provide so many
services to people that we, we, we are United, right?
Who the United States of America we're supposed to be a gigantic community.
And one of the great things that we could do for each other is to make sure that
if someone's sick or injured and something's wrong,
that we can take care of that we would like everybody to do their share.
And we would like everybody to chip in so that this is possible,
but there's a big difference between that and fixing the price on an ad.
Well.
No, but not economically. There's no difference morally there is. And,
and I agree with you morally, we do have the,
we have the same goal of getting everybody adequate care, right.
But from an economic standpoint, but from an economic standpoint, my, my,
my point still stands and, and you can apply that to any industry.
But I think we're looking at medical care as a basic human, right.
Instead of just an economic. Yeah. The.
Reason I don't describe it as if it's not in your right.
It is both a moral and an economic issue. But for, for,
for my, my argument that you will reduce supply, that is fundamentally true.
It is fundamentally true. We see another countries. It's why,
as we compare ourselves to other countries right now,
all these places with socialized medicine, it's important to look at some stats.
And actually I have them here. I could take the time to pick them up, but I'll,
but I'll, I'll give you the bottom line up front.
We have overwhelmingly per capita,
more ICU beds in this country than any other Western country
overwhelmingly per capita.
We have more ventilators than any of these other people. We're all,
we're all freaking out right now because we're worried about our ventilators and
in our ICU beds, on a per capita basis, our system has way,
way more than the UK than Italy and Spain and Germany, all of them like,
like orders of magnitude more. Okay. So, okay.
Also we're the ones who innovate. I mean,
the vast majority of research and development and new drugs that come out that
comes from this country. So these are, these are facts that we can't escape.
If we do price controls and Medicare for all is fundamentally a system of price
controls. If we do that economically speaking, we absolutely will reduce supply.
I understand the moral argument you're making,
which is we still want to help people. Yes, we should.
We should be looking for the ways to do that,
but I want to be able to do that in a way that doesn't undercut the foundations
of the good parts of our healthcare system, which is quality and innovation.
If we undercut those things, and we're the last country doing this,
we're the last country in the world, truly doing innovation. Uh,
the world is left out to dry. Can I pause you there?
This, what you're saying makes a lot of sense. Is there a way to do both?
Is there a way to provide healthcare to everyone,
but also encourage this innovation encouraged profit?
So you encourage these companies to do all these great things that you're
describing and, and,
and maintain this incredibly high level of healthcare that we have right now.
That's certainly the goal, right? And, and that, that should be the goal.
And this is why I think there's,
there's gotta be room for compromise on the healthcare debate because you can't
compromise with the other party. If the goals aren't the same,
like I I've come to believe that our goals on immigration are actually not the
same. Okay. So it's hard to compromise on healthcare. They should be the same,
like, cause we, we, we want everybody to have access to quality healthcare.
Now they have a very different way of getting to that point.
We have probably a much more complicated.
We recognize how difficult it is to get to that point while also ensuring that
we maintain quality and innovation. And so,
um, what I'm working on personally is, is the primary care side of things. Okay.
So primary care doctor is your,
that's your first point of contact and healthcare.
And the system that I think works best for that as direct primary care.
So direct primary care basically means that you, Joe, you're a doctor. Um,
you can handle about 250, 300 patients at a time.
They all pay you a subscription fee of about $75 a month and they have full
access to you. So it's like less than a cell phone bill. This already exists.
This model is prevalent. It's growing. I would like to see it grow much faster.
Okay. How do you do that? Well,
we can subsidize lower income people in order to do that.
Now how we do that is very complicated. That's what I'm working out. Um,
and within our complicated system,
but that's an idea to one make that free market model actually
take off so that people who don't need help with their healthcare costs like you
and me, we can still afford that. Just like we afford any other monthly costs.
And you have access to preventative medicine, you have access to telemedicine.
You actually have a doctor patient relationship that makes it a lot easier to
start solving the rest of the problem. Um,
making our insurance market more competitive, making, putting more choice in it,
directly subsidizing those who need it,
but in a way that looks a lot more like Medicare advantage.
So Medicare advantage is a part of Medicare that basically forces competition
and choice between insurance companies.
It came out to be a lot cheaper than we originally thought it would in the early
two thousands. When, when this thing was created,
this was a Republican plan because there's certain foundations that I think we
have to adhere to anytime we want to problem solve choice and competition are
among, I mean, you, you can't escape those things.
And I think when he would talk about Medicare for all, it tries to,
it tries to move past these essential foundations, um,
whether of a free society that we have to adhere to. And,
and because the, the other thing I, I pushed back on a little bit is,
is the healthcare is a right. Um, S a statement.
And I pushed back against that because what that,
when you're calling something a right,
what you're effectively saying is that somebody else has a obligation to serve
you. And it's hard to call something a right, when that right.
Requires service of somebody else, don't do that. Don't.
You already do that with the firemen.
Don't we do that with the police department.
Don't we do that with public schools? No.
Not exactly. No. I mean, we, we, we have public services that I would,
I would distinguish those public services from something like a rec
quantum of care. I would distinguish them to it to an enormous extent, like,
and here's why you can add a few hundred thousand more people to, uh, you know,
to, to the nation's population.
And it doesn't change the mission of the military, right? Like it doesn't,
it doesn't take an away thing away from them, but these,
but because of the sort of non-rival, um,
this is like an economics term for the sort of non-rival
attribute of these things. It is different, right?
Because there's only a select number of doctors.
And we've already said that once you put price controls and there's going to be
less doctors, because doctors will be paid less, they'll get burned out more.
Um, they'll the then possibles will be able to,
I actually never finished that point. Um,
the reason price controls reduce supply, and we're using,
we see supply reductions than other countries is because, well,
hospitals don't get the same amount of money.
They're not gonna invest in that extra ICU bed.
They're not going to buy those extra ventilators.
They're not going to hire those other doctors.
A doctor doesn't want to be a doctor because they don't make the amount of money
that they thought they would make. Um,
they're doing extra work because there's more people who now have access to
them, but there's less of them. So wait lines are huge. And they didn't,
and they're seeing multiple more patients a day.
Doctor burnout increases quite a bit. That's the quick answers to why, why,
why that happens. But does that kind of answer your question?
It was getting really, yeah.
The human right issue. We, we kind of moved around with that, this,
the idea that it's different than the fire department or the police department.
Or, well, it's not a right either actually the, the, the fire departments,
not necessarily a, a right as we would, but it's.
Service that's provided to everyone now.
It is. But, but, but, but understand, so let's call it a public service then,
and let's call a doctor healthcare, a public service as well,
if we were to do Medicare for all.
But wouldn't the result be the same if it's provided for everyone?
Um, not, not from a practical standpoint, just because it's much easier. Again,
you could add a hundred thousand people more to your city and the fire
department would have marginally more, more work to do, you know,
compared to like an, a doctor, for instance. Does that make sense?
Like you just, it doesn't, I think on a,
if we're trying to compare them in that sense, that,
that non-rival attributes, um, matter,
it matters quite a bit if I'm describing that. Correct.
So what you're saying is because competition is necessary with medical
innovation and also like doctors profit off
of being exceptional. So you, you, they have incentive to be exceptional.
No, no. What I'm saying is if you have,
if you have 10 doctors that are serving a community, um,
every time that doctor is serving somebody,
it means somebody else can't see them. Well.
Isn't that just a signal that we need,
more doctors and more hospitals they're understaffed. Uh.
It, it would be, yes,
but I'm saying that's how it's different from a fire department,
which is sort of lying in wait for a fire to occur. Well,
if there was more fires. Yeah. But, but just unlikely most of the time,
I'm just, I'm, I'm trying, I'm trying to distinguish why those,
why those aren't very comparable things. Like what,
why one is more of a public service that, that we see to work while,
while the other wouldn't necessarily be in for, and, and,
and you kind of just said it yourself,
it would be a signal for there to be more doctors, um,
which is why the free market, um, price,
price points are so important because the only way to signal that is to
actually, um, uh,
that demand raises prices when the government tries to do that.
Now there's this theory as a socialist that they would say,
the government can just figure that out. Um, I,
I would say that they've tried that in the past. It never works. It never,
it just, it never ever works.
The government can't possibly be so omniscient as to know every single price
signal and anticipate every single piece of demand
and production that is therefore required. And so, you know,
it's not just healthcare that this is a problem. It's,
it's every aspect of society. So.
If I can go back to what you were saying earlier,
so what you're essentially saying about socialism,
that socialism looks at this problem and says, Hey,
let's make the government take care of everything.
Let's take money from the wealthy people and pour it into the government.
And that the government will then have resources to take care of these issues.
And you'll, you're just looking at the first step of the problem.
You're not looking at the secondary or tertiary
instances or things that are going to go sideways.
Once you do implement that first step, is that what you're saying?
It's a hundred percent what I'm saying. I would,
I would add the social and leaves out some very important things like,
like human nature, uh, for instance, and,
and this, this notion that we need incentives,
um,
socialism doesn't believe in incentives doesn't believe that we need incentive
to do things. There's, there's, there's,
there's this utopian belief among the most hardcore
socialists that, that humans will act in this,
in this kind of philanthropic manner, no matter what,
like we're going to do the most amount of work, even if that reward is,
is overwhelmingly, taken away from us and redistributed.
But of course that's not how it would actually function in reality,
you would start to you. It just wouldn't right.
And so you're now maybe for a few people,
if you altruistic people would be the ones, you know,
doing all the work while everybody else is like pretending to work,
which was what happened in the Soviet union. You pretend to pay us,
we'll pretend to work. Right. But that was the saying from the Soviet union.
That's I think we intuitively understand that. And, and, and when that happened,
and again, the same thing with Medicare, for all, if, if you're,
if you have price controls, your incentives change. And, and if we're,
if we're not really serious about understanding that aspect of, of these,
of these policies, then we're, we're, we're not thinking through them correctly.
And I understand a lot of Democrats would say, well, it's Medicare for all.
It's not socialism. And I'm like, yeah, but it,
but it has very socialistic tendencies.
And it has these qualities that I've described of not taking into account the
second, third order effects of removing human incentive of, of, of,
of forcing somebody services. And because you're calling it a right,
which means that you now have a right to somebody else's services like these
are, these are things that have been proven not to work. And,
and I, and I think we, and I think we have to understand that as,
as we try to move towards the mutual goal of getting everybody access to
healthcare.
It doesn't work with everything, but it does.
Doesn't that work with the fire department?
Isn't the fire department in a lot of ways, a socialist institution.
No, no, I, again,
I still say it is not because it is not under any obligation to serve
everybody, um, that, that demands its service, right.
It's there for specific emergency service as a, as a public, but.
It's there for fire. If there's a fire, they, they come in and help you.
There's not a financial incentive for them to do so.
Right. But I mean, but, but on a practical level, on a practical level though,
imagine the scaling that has to occur if you're,
if you're doing that with medic with medical care and I, and I think that's,
and I think that's the difference with, from an economic point in a,
in a practical standpoint.
We're talking about over, well, you're talking about socialism overall,
not just overall, not just involving medicine,
you're talking about socialism in general,
and I'm saying isn't the fire department and an example of socialism that works
well.
Definitely not an example of socialism. Um,
I think it's an example of a public good,
the way the military is an example of a public good.
The way the highways are examples of public goods, the way parks are, right.
But they're funded by the people it's funded by people overall.
And it doesn't cost people money to use them.
And the people have these as a basic part of our society and our
civilization.
No, I understand that. And I have nothing, no problem with that. I just,
I just would not call them socialists. Well, what'd you.
Call the fire department? W w how does it get funded?
It's a public good, how's it get funded?
It's a public good it's with it's funded by the public. And it just,
it's not it's, but it's not relying on these sort of,
it's not relying on the tenants of socialism to function. And so now we're,
now we're kind of having a discussion of, of definitions.
And this is an important discussion to have, because
oftentimes even Democrats, aren't really talking about socialism. Well,
even Germany.
Has Bernie Sanders. Doesn't call it socialism.
He's talking about democratic socialism,
and he makes some very clear distinctions between the two of them,
which I think you could apply to things like the fire department or the police
department.
Yeah. Um, there's a lot in that. So I think Bernie, yes,
he does say democratic socialism. I think he does mean much something much,
much closer to socialism. And that's just me gleaning from his policies. Um,
because he does talk about putting, you know,
government control on corporate boards.
Elizabeth Warren talked about the same thing.
So now we really are talking about nationalizing things. Um,
when you're talking about mass price controls across all industries on wage
controls, that you really are talking about more of an actual socialism,
again, going back to the,
whether a fire department or a park or a public highway,
or the military is a socialist institution. Again, I, I would, I would,
I would really push back against that. That is a, that is a public good.
We've never in our culture, in our economics.
We've never defined these things as socialists institutions, you know,
socialist institution effectively means you're, you're, you're, you're,
you're seizing the means of production. And you're,
you're forcing everybody into a centralized planning state. Um, you're, you're,
you're telling people what they will earn and what you will pay them,
how much they can sell, you know, the,
you start to take more control over the economy.
A lot of the policies set out by Bernie Sanders are movements in that direction.
Uh, the fire department is really not that again, that is,
that is a public service. It has a defined, you know, it has a defined budget.
It has a defined role. Uh, um,
it doesn't, it doesn't meet any of those other attributes or elements that I,
that I described when I described what a socialist is.
And so this gets into another question, like, what will,
why maybe Bernie just means the Nordic countries, right. And, you know,
I remember the foreign minister from Denmark came to Harvard.
I think he gave a speech. This was a few years ago. And he said,
stop calling a socialist. We're not socialists we're, we're probably,
and I would agree, agree with them. Um, all these Nordic countries have frankly,
more of a free market than we do, uh, in,
in many ways when we look at their regulatory standards, they're, they're,
they're quite liberal. Um, when we look at their corporate tax rates,
it's very low, they don't have a minimum wage, uh, in, in many cases. And so,
you know, they're not socialist countries.
What they do have is a very generous welfare state and,
and that's different than [inaudible], that is different than socialism. It's
a giant welfare state. Now I'm still against that in
many ways. I think there's consequences to that giant welfare state that, that they now have to suffer with
, um,  as a result. And if you've noticed too, that they D
they actually used to be very socialist countries, but their economies crashed,
or as a result, and over time, they became much more free market. Uh,
we see the same thing out of Israel. We see the same thing out of India. It
used to be much more deeply socialist countries. And
a lot of them have just maintained their
big welfare states, which they are having trouble paying for just like we're having trouble paying for our big welfare state, which is mostly based
in social security, Medicaid and Medicare.
W when you say public good, right.
This is what you feel that the fire department is, it's a public good. Right.
What do you think that it's possible to implement something like that with,
in regards to medical care? Yeah.
Yeah. I mean, so this is a discussion. If we,
if we get our definitions straight and we're just saying, okay,
we just want another public good. And it's medical. So that's a,
that's a more accurate way of describing it. I think people.
Don't care what's called right. We just want healthcare.
Right. But, but then we get back to the discussion we had before. Okay.
What if we did that? Well, there's a cost to it,
and it's a hell of a lot more than the fire department and police department.
Um, the cost by,
by most estimates is in the mid 30 something trillion dollars.
Uh, that's a cost on that for over 10 years. So about,
about three and a half trillion per year.
So that's basically doubling our budget just every year. Um,
that's in addition to what we already spent. Okay.
So that's additional federal spending. Some, some,
some people try to massage those numbers and say, oh,
but that's actually cheaper than what we have. Now, if you add it all together,
that is false. That is, that is completely false. I, again,
I have a whole podcast where I actually interviewed the guy who made that study,
uh, the economists who did that study, and that's not a controversial study.
Everybody basically agrees Elizabeth Warren's plan was 50 something trillion
dollars.
That's adding what we already spend to the new spending that would have to
occur. So what does that mean in practice?
It means doubling or tripling your taxes, unless,
unless we try to deficit spend it, which I think would be crazy.
So it means doubling or tripling your taxes. And so then,
and then the question is, okay, fine. Well,
I do want to double or triple my taxes. I mean,
some people will say that I don't actually believe them.
I bet once they got their taxes, they would totally change their mind,
but let's say they're totally into it. Okay.
Let's say they actually want to do that.
Then you have the second and third order consequences, which is okay,
what are you getting for this? What is,
what is this new utopia that we really live in, where healthcare is free?
And then I go back to, okay, in order to meet that price point of the,
the three and a half trillion a year that's that's, by the way,
assuming that we continue using Medicare prices, um,
which is what all the plans do assume by the way. Um, so if we're doing that,
we're drastically cutting prices that we pay doctors and hospitals.
If we do that, we drastically cut our supply of doctors and hospitals and we,
and we, and we cut off and choke off the innovative capacity that we do have.
So we're losing those quality, um, those quality points again.
So how do you get people care? Well,
the main problem we have with healthcare in this country is that it cost too
much. That's fundamentally the problem.
It is too costly. And so from the Republican side,
but we'd rather do is actually target the source of the problem,
make it easier to get insurance. Cause right now, I mean, you know,
it's for so many Americans, that insurance is just too expensive.
If you have it through your employer, it's usually pretty good.
People are pretty happy with that. But for the most part, it's too expensive,
which is why I go back to my direct primary care idea. Because once you hit,
once you solve the direct primary, the primary care issue,
you make solving insurance much easier. You can talk,
then you can still protect people with pre-existing conditions. Uh,
we like things like either high risk pools at the state level or re-insurance
programs. Uh, you, you can make this, uh, you,
you can continue to make improvements to the system that make it affordable for
people. And you can give people a box system that they need. Well,
so get out of that.
Sorry, you broke up there for a second.
This whole connection of doing things remotely sucks. What did you,
can you say that last statement again? Just the last few words that you said.
Um, I I'm, well, you were talking about.
Insurance. Here's my question about the whole thing.
Like insurance still has to pay for it, then it's still, you're still paying.
Someone's still paying for all this healthcare.
If the insurance companies aren't making any profit,
because they're paying for all the healthcare, then what happens then?
Do we fund the insurance companies? I mean,
how does all this stuff get evened out?
Are you referring to cases where like, you know, the cost of somebody cares.
So astronomically expensive that even the insurance company can't afford it,
look.
Here's the problem. Right? People can't afford healthcare. So we get them.
Insurance insurance takes care of healthcare.
How did the insurance companies make any money then?
Well, I mean, they make a profit just like, just like anybody else,
but they're also, they're,
they're also what we've found is especially with our experiments with Medicare
advantage is when you pit insurance companies against each other and in a free
market, um, they lower costs. You know, they,
they are a natural, there's different,
there's different elements of the healthcare system. Um,
on one side is driving up costs, you know,
because the doctor wants to keep doing more tests or whatever it is, or,
or a patient wants to do more things. The insurance company's job is to say,
hold on a second, why are you doing this? What is the reason for this?
What's the outcome that we expect from this? So that naturally drives. That's a,
that's a natural, um, uh, you know,
bulwark against higher costs. The government would in a Medicare for all steam,
the government would simply replace that insurance company. We,
we should be very careful when assuming that the government will somehow be
better at that than insurance companies.
I'm not saying insurance companies are great at all.
Everybody doesn't seem to like them,
but I also don't want the government doing it.
I don't want to be in a case like in great Britain where,
where the government will say, you know what,
your grandad's not on the ventilator anymore. We're done with that.
Or your baby can't get that care. I mean,
we've all seen these stories and we don't have that issue in America.
Um, but can I pause.
You don't we have a problem with insurance companies not want to pay for certain
things. They.
Might, but they still, but the care still happens. Um,
the hospital has to eat that care a lot. And there's,
there's different funding mechanisms that them, I mean, we have a really,
I'm not defending our healthcare system. I want to be clear about that.
It's definitely not perfect. It's a huge patchwork, but no, that doesn't,
that's not the way it happens over there, because over there,
like in great Britain, if you actually nationalize the healthcare system,
the way they do,
it's when they say you're not going to be on the ventilator anymore,
there's no choice. Like, that's, that, that is, that is the decision.
And then that's what they have to deal with. And so it's, it is different.
But don't, they have some private health care over there as well.
I think they might have elements of it. Same with Canada, but, but,
but not for basic care, like,
so you can use for other kinds of health care that aren't necessarily
yeah. Like elective stuff. Yeah.
And I I'd have to really get some details for you on what each country does,
but it's limited. They limit what they can actually do. Okay.